A 50-year-old woman with a history of asthma presented to the emergency department with chest pain and worsening dyspnea. Approximately 1 year before presentation, intermittent episodes of nonradiating chest tightness and shortness of breath had developed. Pulmonary function testing was consistent with asthma. She was treated with inhaled glucocorticoids and albuterol and had some abatement of symptoms. One week before presentation, worsening shortness of breath had developed, which she thought was related to her asthma.
She had recently received her third dose of a messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), although she was not certain about the precise temporal relationship to the onset of symptoms. Despite treatment with escalating doses of inhaled glucocorticoids and inhaled albuterol, her symptoms progressed. On the day of presentation, pleuritic chest pain developed, which radiated to the back and was worsened by exertion but not by positional changes.
She reported no orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, dyspnea when bending forward, fevers, chills, night sweats, weight changes, myalgias, arthralgias, rashes, wheezing, anosmia, dysgeusia, or ageusia.
Acute coronary syndrome, pulmonary embolism, and aortic dissection all warrant urgent consideration in this patient with dyspnea and chest pain. Myopericarditis has been reported after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination and should also be included in the differential diagnosis, although she has no positional pain and this complication is more often seen in young men after the second vaccine dose. Given her recent diagnosis of asthma, an asthma exacerbation and pneumothorax should also be considered.
In addition to the recent asthma diagnosis, the patient’s medical history was notable for allergic rhinitis, obesity, hyperlipidemia, prediabetes, and depression. Her medications included bupropion (150 mg daily), cetirizine (10 mg daily), and fluticasone–salmeterol (250 μg of fluticasone and 50 μg of salmeterol per actuation, administered by inhaler twice daily). She had no known drug allergies. Her sister, mother, and maternal uncle all had a genetically determined familial cardiomyopathy (truncating mutation in the sarcomeric protein titin), but the patient herself did not carry the mutation. Her father had coronary artery disease for which he had had a stent placed when he was 63 years of age.
She lived in a suburb of Boston, Massachusetts, and worked remotely for an investment company. She had not traveled in the past several years. She had no pets or any other known animal exposures. Approximately 8 months before presentation, the patient began renovating her home, during which time mold was identified in her bathroom. She drank less than one alcoholic beverage per week. She had never smoked cigarettes, vaped, or used other recreational drugs.
The absence of a history of hypertension, smoking, connective-tissue disorders, or a family history of aortopathy make aortic dissection less likely. The exposure history raises the possibility of an allergic trigger for an asthma exacerbation. The family history of cardiomyopathy would arouse concern about this condition, but she has a history of testing negative for the causative mutation. Although her father’s coronary event warrants consideration, his presentation does not meet the usual criterion for premature coronary artery disease (defined as before 55 years of age in men and before 65 years of age in women).
On physical examination, she appeared to be uncomfortable. Her body temperature was 37.2°C, heart rate 101 beats per minute, blood pressure 133/68 mm Hg, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 95% while she was breathing ambient air. Nasal polyps were not observed. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy. Both lungs were clear to auscultation without wheezing or rales. A cardiac examination revealed a tachycardic but regular rhythm without murmurs, rubs, or gallops; the jugular venous pressure was approximately 7 cm of water. The chest pain was not reproduced with palpation of the chest wall. The abdomen was soft, nontender, and nondistended, without hepatosplenomegaly. Radial, posterior tibial, and dorsal pedal pulses were 2+ bilaterally and were symmetric. No calf swelling or peripheral edema was present. There was no rash. A neurologic examination did not reveal any deficits.
The physical examination was notable only for tachycardia and tachypnea. The tachycardia and a high clinical suspicion for pulmonary embolism would classify her as being at intermediate risk for this diagnosis according to the Wells criteria. On the basis of this stratification, the d-dimer level should be measured and, if normal, pulmonary embolism can be effectively ruled out. If the d-dimer level is elevated, a computed tomographic (CT) pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) should be performed. Acute coronary syndrome and myopericarditis can both manifest with an essentially normal physical examination and therefore remain high on the differential diagnosis.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac biomarkers should be obtained. Aortic dissection is less likely, given the normal vascular examination, although a physical examination is not sufficiently sensitive to rule out the diagnosis with confidence. The absence of wheezing and the presence of breath sounds in both lungs make an asthma exacerbation or pneumothorax less likely, although chest radiography should still be performed to rule out the latter.
The d-dimer level was 632 ng per liter (reference value, <500), the high-sensitivity troponin T level 606 ng per liter (reference range, 0 to 9), the high-sensitivity C-reactive protein level 12.1 mg per liter (reference range, 0 to 3), and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate 31 mm per hour (reference range, 0 to 30). The white-cell count was 14,700 per microliter, with 39.6% eosinophils (reference range, 0 to 5), and the absolute eosinophil count was 5820 per microliter (reference range, 0 to 500).
No previous blood counts were available for review. A full respiratory viral panel (including SARS-CoV-2) was negative. The ECG showed sinus tachycardia without other abnormalities. Chest radiography showed no acute abnormality. CTPA showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection but did show hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy measuring up to 1.2 cm in diameter
